---
title: "Make the easy change hard"
authors:
  - drmorr
datetime: 2025-08-25 11:00:00
template: post.html
---

<figure markdown>
  ![The dude sitting in front of a computer monitor, out of which is pouring a giant mass of spaghetti.  The dude is attempting to sort the spaghetti into neat piles.](/img/posts/thedude.png)
  <figcaption>
    I'd say this is a setup for a joke later on in the blog post, except the joke doesn't even make sense,
    so I don't really know what this is.  Generated by ChatGPT.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

There's a semi-well-known adage in software development that says when you have a hard code change, you should "first
make the hard change easy, and then make the easy change."  In other words, refactor the code (or do whatever else you
need to do) to simplify the change you're trying to make _before_ trying to make the change.  This is especially good
advice if you have a good automated test suite---you can first do your refactor without changing any program behaviour,
and be relatively confident that you haven't introduced any bugs or regressions in your refactor; and then you can make
a smaller change that actually introduces your new feature.

Today I'm going to talk about how I followed the opposite of this advice for SimKube: I first made the easy change hard,
and then I made the hard change.  Because I can never do anything easy.  Anyways this is going to be a fairly technical
post, with a bit of a deep dive into SimKube internals and also a bunch of Rust programming techniques, so I hope you've
had your coffee!

## Who owns the owned objects?

First, a quick overview of the problem I needed to solve: in Kubernetes, resources can be owned by other resources.  For
example, a Deployment owns zero or more ReplicaSets, and each ReplicaSet owns zero or more Pods.  These are tracked by
setting an `OwnerReference` on the _owned_ resource; if you wanted to know what Deployment a Pod belongs to, you would
follow the chain of `OwnerReference`s from the Pod to the ReplicaSet to the Deployment[^1][^2].

Recall that in SimKube, there is a component called the _tracer_, which lives in your production Kubernetes cluster and
watches for changes to the resources in that cluster.  You can then export those changes to a trace file for replay in
your simulated environment.  In the tracer, you can configure what resources to watch like this:

```yaml
trackedObjects:
  apps/v1.Deployment:
    podSpecTemplatePaths:
      - /spec/template
```

The above config file tells the tracer to watch for changes to Deployments in the cluster[^3].  In this case, when you
replay a trace in your simulated environment, SimKube would create all of the Deployments specified in the trace file,
and then the controller manager in your simulated cluster would create the ReplicaSets and Pods that are owned by those
Deployments.  This is all fine and good, but what would happen if you had a config file that looked like this?

```yaml
trackedObjects:
  apps/v1.Deployment:
    podSpecTemplatePaths:
      - /spec/template
  apps/v1.ReplicaSet:
    podSpecTemplatePaths:
      - /spec/template
```

Now, the tracer would record changes to all Deployments _and_ ReplicaSets in the cluster; when we replay this trace in
the simulated environment, SimKube would create all of the Deployments, as well as all of the ReplicaSets owned by those
Deployments.  At the same time, the controller manager in the simulation cluster would create a _second copy_ of the
ReplicaSets owned by those deployments.  Whoops!  Now we have two copies of our ReplicaSets.  That's no good.

Now normally, there would be no reason to have a config file like this, you could just track the "root objects" and call
it a day.  But now imagine a more complicated scenario, where you have a custom resource that you want to simulate (say,
an Airflow DAG Resource) that creates _Deployments_; now you're in a situation where _some_ Deployments in your trace
have owners and other Deployments are the root objects.

So this is the core problem I was trying to solve; in the tracer, we should be able to tell the difference between these
two types of resources using the `OwnerReference` field; if an object that the tracer is tracking is owned by _some
other object_ that the tracer is tracking, we shouldn't store it in the exported trace.

## Arcs, Mutexes, and Channels, oh my!

To understand how to fix this bug, we need to know a little bit about the internals of the tracer.  Here's how it looks:

![The Kubernetes API server on the left has arrows to boxes labeled "Dynamic Object Watcher", and one box labeled "Pod
Watcher.  Each of the watchers has an arrow to a box labeled "Trace Store"; the trace store has a bidirectional arrow to
a box labeled http://tracer/export.](/img/posts/sk-tracer-1.png)

Because the resources the tracer is watching are configured at runtime, we use the dynamic object API to set watches on
the Kubernetes API server for these resources; there are `n` of these watchers, one for each configured resource type.
There is also one watcher that tracks changes to Pod objects, for the purposes of recording Pod lifecycle events
(creation, deletion, etc).

Each of these watchers communicates updates to the `TraceStore`, which is the in-memory storage backend for the tracer.
Lastly, there is a [Rocket](https://rocket.rs) server that exposes an `/export` endpoint to the `TraceStore` so that
users can export a trace to long-term storage.

The way this _used to_ work is that each of the watchers (as well as the Rocket server) held a reference to the store
through an `Arc<Mutex<TraceStore>>`.  If you've done any async Rust programming, you'll recognize this pattern; it's a
way for objects on multiple threads or coroutines to safely read and write to a shared singleton.  Now, in the old
architecture, the Pod watcher also had a cache of `OwnerReference`s.  This is so that we only track lifecycle data
for pods that are owned by some higher-level resource in the trace.

Now we can get to the change I wanted to make: we want to look up owners for _all_ resources, not just Pods.  Easy
change, right?  Just stick the ownership cache in the `TraceStore` and call it a day!  Boom, done.

I'm sure if you've done much async Rust programming, you see the problem with this plan, but let's walk through it
anyways.  Specifically: why do we have a cache for the owner references?  Looking up a recursive chain of owners to find
the root owner involves repeated calls to the Kubernetes API server which a) could add additional load to the server,
and b) will block other threads or coroutines while we hold an exclusive lock on the `TraceStore`.  So instead, we look
up the ownership chain _once_ and then cache it, because ownership doesn't change.

This was approximately fine when the Pod watcher was the only thing that needed access to the ownership cache, but now
every resource update is going to potentially involve a bunch of API calls if there's a cache miss, so we're back to
square one with regards to our mutex locks.  The solution here, as I'm sure you've already seen, is to remove the
`TraceStore` handles from each of the watchers, and instead communicate with the store via channels.  Et voila, we've
just made the easy change hard!

## The Dude ~Abides~ Refactors

Yea I dunno where that headline came from either.  Anyways let's see what our new proposed architecture is going to look
like:

![The Kubernetes API server on the left has arrows to boxes labeled "Dynamic Object Watcher", and one box labeled "Pod
Watcher.  Each of the dynamic object watchers has an arrow to a box labeled "mpsc::Channel"; the pod watcher has an
arrow to a separate "mpsc::Channel" box.  The channel boxes point to the Trace Store, which has a bidirectional arrow
to a box labeled http://tracer/export.](/img/posts/sk-tracer-2.png)

Instead of having each watcher hold an `Arc<Mutex<TraceStore>>`, now the watchers have an `mpsc::Channel::Writer`[^4],
which they use to send messages to the `TraceStore`.  This decouples the watchers from the store: the watchers can now
get updates from the Kubernetes API server as fast as it can send them, without blocking on any "expensive" operations
that the `TraceStore` needs to do[^5].  If you've done any Go programming, this is the standard pattern for goroutine
communication.

This is objectively a better design, and is probably the one I should have gone with at the beginning[^6], but making
the change _now_ requires digging into some of the oldest code in the SimKube codebase.  This is all code that I wrote
back when a) I didn't know as much about Rust as I do now, and b) I didn't really know what I was doing with SimKube.
So it's gonna be a messy change.

The whole giant PR is on GitHub ([1](https://github.com/acrlabs/simkube/pull/199),
[2](https://github.com/acrlabs/simkube/pull/200)) if you just wanna look at the code, but here I'll talk about some of
the specific challenges I ran into.

### Tokio versus the Standard Library

Most of the primitives that we need (channels, mutexes, etc) are implemented in the Rust standard library.  They are,
confusingly, _also_ implemented in [tokio](https://tokio.rs), which is the most popular async runtime for Rust, and also
the async runtime SimKube uses.  Why are there both?  Well, locks on the `tokio::Mutex` can be held across `.await`
points, where as the standard library `Mutex` cannot.  The tokio documentation states that you probably don't want to
use this because it is more expensive and you can "probably" refactor your code to not hold the `Mutex` across a wait.

Unfortunately, we can't use `std::mpsc::Channel` because they are not `Send`, and thus can't be used in an async or
multi-threaded environment.  We _must_ use tokio's versions of these channels, which then implies that we _must_ hold a
`Mutex` lock across the channel's `.await`.  The tokio documentation doesn't _really_ explain what the performance
impacts of its fancy `Mutex` are, and suggests that it is "easy" to not use them, but I spent quite a while trying to
figure out a suitable way to architect it without using `tokio::Mutex` and eventually gave up.  Would be nice if there
was some better documentation about the tradeoffs I'm subjecting myself to here.

### Mutable `recv`

A consequence of the above decision[^7] is that `std::mpsc::Channel`s do not take a mutable `self` reference when you
call `recv`, but `tokio::mpsc::Channel`s do.  I don't know if this is an _intentional_ design difference between the APIs
or not (I assume it must be?) but the implication is that you can't stick the channel receivers inside the `TraceStore`
itself without wrapping _them_ in an `Arc<Mutex<...>>`; aside from being _really annoying to use_, it didn't make any
sense at all to me to have an `Arc<Mutex<TraceStore>>` (which is actually a singleton object) that holds
`Arc<Mutex<Receiver>>`s.

I was able to refactor around this by introducing an intermediate "manager" object that facilitates the communication
between the watchers and the store.  However, this introduces another wrinkle: tokio channels are async, which means
ideally we'd spawn them in a separate task and let them go, but tokio tasks must be `'static`.  But the channels that
I'm constructing are dynamically created at runtime, which means they can't be `'static`[^8].  Figuring out how to
coerce the compiler into accepting all this code was a bunch of time spent that I'll never get back: the short version
is that the main "message coordinator" routine is a [static function](https://github.com/acrlabs/simkube/blob/master/sk-store/src/manager.rs)
that takes ownership of the channel receivers, but getting this to work required a bunch of fighting the Rust ownership
model.

### Rust ownership, Kubernetes ownership, it's all ownership

Bringing this back to the quote at the beginning, I split this change across two PRs ([1](https://github.com/acrlabs/simkube/pull/199),
[2](https://github.com/acrlabs/simkube/pull/200)).  The first change was attempting to make the hard change easy by
implementing the channel communication with the store, and the second change was my attempt to make the easy change.
It turned out, though, that "making the easy change" wasn't actually that easy.  I realized extremely late in the
process that filtering out resources owned by other tracked resources _at ingest time_ was a bad decision: there are no
guarantees on ordering for the messages the `TraceStore` receives, so it's possible that it receives a message about a
new ReplicaSet _before_ it receives a message about the Deployment that owns the ReplicaSet.  Then when it looks up the
ReplicaSet's ownership information, it won't find anything, and we'll end up with a duplicate in our simulation.

Instead, what we need to do is check the ownership conditions at _export time_.  That is, when a user requests an
exported trace, we then filter out all of the stored resources that are owned by something else[^9].  But this required
me to go in and do _another_ refactor on how we filter out objects in our exported trace.  At this point, I had spent
multiple weeks in the refactoring mines and was very eager to get out of them, so I'm not 100% certain that this bit of
code was the best thing ever, but it all seems to work (for now).  Whew!

There is a new version of SimKube (2.4.0) on [GitHub](https://github.com/acrlabs/simkube/releases/tag/v2.4.0), [crates.io](https://crates.io/search?q=sk-tracer),
and [quay.io](https://quay.io/repository/appliedcomputing/sk-tracer) that contains this new code, along with a couple
smaller bug-fixes and improvements.

Anyways, I hope you enjoyed coming along for the ride on my SimKube refactoring adventure, and maybe hopefully you
learned something about Kubernetes and/or Rust along the way!

As always, thanks for reading; until next time,

~drmorr

[^1]: Kubernetes uses this information for garbage collection, among other things.  Once all an object’s owners have
    been deleted, the object itself can safely be deleted.

[^2]: It is actually possible for an object to have more than one `OwnerReference`; I've never seen a use-case for this,
    but I'm sure one exists.

[^3]: The `podSpecTemplatePaths` field is used to tell SimKube where the definition of Pod(s) owned by the resource
    live; that way during a simulation, SimKube can sanitize and remove irrelevant fields from the Pod specification.

[^4]: `mpsc` stands for "multiple producer, single consumer", which is the most common type of channel and also the
    easiest to implement (or so I've been told).  Other types of channels are "single producer, multiple consumer" and
    "multiple producer, multiple consumer", which involve a bunch of other tradeoffs that we don't need to worry about.

[^5]: The `TraceStore` still needs to be behind an `Arc<Mutex<...>>` for the Rocket endpoint, but it will only be locked
    in the event that a user calls `/export` which is a comparatively rare event to receiving channel messages.

[^6]: It also means that the simulation components (the controller and simulation driver) don't need to construct a
    whole `TraceStore` to run their simulations, which was a weird consequence of the old design that I never liked.

[^7]: Is it really a decision if there's no other alternative?

[^8]: At least not without some really weird and gross hacks.

[^9]: There's still a potential race condition here if the user requests an export between when the ReplicaSet update
    and the Deployment update happen, but that's a pretty rare/unusual circumstance, and would be something that could
    easily be cleaned up after the fact in the exported trace file.
