---
title: "The Ennui Exhibition"
authors:
  - drmorr
datetime: 2025-05-26 11:00:00
template: post.html
---

**Editor's note:** I wrote this post a couple days ago, and then gave a talk at the [Cloud Native PDX](https://www.meetup.com/cloud-native-pdx/events/306802106/)
meetup last night, and came away feeling really energized and had some great conversations.  I debated whether or not to
even make this post or not.  Is it too depressing?  I've been promising technical content for a while and haven't posted
it, should I do that instead?  In the end I decided to go ahead with this post, just because I want to acknowledge the
journey.  Doing what I'm doing is hard, and it's a roller coaster.  Some days are good, and some days are bad, and
sometimes those are the same day[^0].  So anyways, I super-double-pinky-swear to write some more entertaining technical
content next time, but for now, know that you're not alone on the roller coaster!

---

Welp the last several weeks have been hard.  From a work sense, nothing particularly bad[^1], but there's been a lot of
travel, a lot of frustrating bureaucracy[^2], some difficult and hard personal news, and just general life busy-ness,
and I'm feeling the "soloprenuer blues" a lot.

I gather that this isn't unusual---[Michael Drogalis](https://substack.com/@michaeldrogalis), one of the bloggers that I
follow who is pursuing a similar path, has written about his experiences here, and I've seen a bunch of encouraging
social media posts about this phenomenon as well.  But it's been almost two years since I started ACRL and... like what
am I doing here?  Am I actually accomplishing anything good or useful?  Objectively I think "yes" but sometimes it feels
hard to see that.

Anyways I'm not here to be another voice of negativity, so I wanted to use this post to talk about some of the
contributing factors I'm experiencing and what I'm trying to do about them---maybe they can be encouraging for someone
who's in the same boat.

## Why things suck

Aside from the general awfulness of everything right now, I think there are a couple of specific technical and business
factors that are contributing to my sense of ennui:

* **My clients are keeping me busy**.  Ok this is actually a good thing---I'm doing work and getting paid for it!  But
  working for two clients at the same time is definitely the limit of what I'm able to do, and while I'm enjoying the
  work that I'm doing for my clients, it has definitely limited my ability to make significant progress on, e.g,
  SimKube.  The development that I'm doing for my own projects is happening in fits and spurts when I can squeeze in the
  time, instead of being a significant and core part of my week.  Coupled with the fact that my next goals for SimKube
  are pretty significant, this means that I'm avoiding actually getting started on any "big" new work here because I
  need/want more than 30 minutes at a time to make significant progress here.  Instead, I'm making small improvements
  and spending _a lot_ of time on tooling and related bug fixes[^3].  None of this work has been _bad_, per se---it's
  stuff that I've wanted to do "sometime", and I'm justifying it by telling myself that I'm building my skills and
  learning about new technologies---and it feels very satisfying and achievable to accomplish something here, but at the
  end of the day, none of that work is helping me pay the bills or get new business.
* **The AI hype train is somehow even more insane than ever**.  At the beginning of the year, I took a break from sales
  and content marketing on LinkedIn, but I've been back at it this last month---which, again, is great.  I've formed a
  couple new connections there that may or may not turn into actual leads, but 98% percent of the _content_ on LinkedIn
  these days is from hype-spewing tech bros telling me how all of my skills and abilities are about to be replaced by AI
  and if I don't jump on the AI train I'm going to become a useless husk of a human Just About Any Day Now :tm:.  This
  is... not an uplifting message to be bombarded by on the daily.  As I [blogged about earlier](./2025-03-17-sudo-make-me-a-makefile.md)
  earlier this year, I have mixed feelings about the current state of AI in general, and I strongly believe that the
  state of AI abilities is _greatly_ exaggerated[^4], but my goodness.  Stop telling me I'm irrelevant, PLEASE[^5].
* **Things are just _hard_ and people are messy**.  I've written about this a bit before, but 2025 has just been a hard
  year so far.  The federal government is fucked up, down, and sideways, and is impacting a lot of people (including
  me!) in ways that we didn't expect and weren't prepared for[^6].  And it just feels hard to get anything done in this
  environment.  "Oh yes more people are getting forcibly deported into the gulag but look at my Kubernetes simulator!"
  is a, uh, weird sentence to utter, and yet I feel like I'm uttering it a lot these days[^8].  There's also, as I
  hinted at above, a bunch of weird personal messy things happening which have been impacting my mental state this year.

## What I'm doing about it

But look, I promised at the beginning of this post to not just talk about all the bad things that are happening, so I'm
going to finish up with some discussion about specific actions I'm taking to combat some of these feelings.

* **Step 1: Refocusing priorities**.  As much fun as it's been setting up more AWS infrastructure[^7], I need to stop
  doing that.  I have a number of priorities that I need to be focusing on this year, which I'm going to list out below
  in an attempt to have some public accountability:
  * _Keep making my clients happy, and make sure they know that they're happy with me_: As far as I can tell, my clients
    are really pleased with the work that I'm doing for them, and continuing to do this is the best way for me to get
    more money in the bank.  It's also a good way for me to do "free" product testing for SimKube in a realistic
    setting, and potentially build more SimKube-related work into my contracts in the future.  So this is (still) my top
    priority: in addition to doing good work, I need to make sure my clients are _aware_ of the good work I'm doing so
    that it's easier for them to keep me on in the future.
  * _Get the SimKube HPA/VPA functionality going_: In my conversations with people around the industry, one of the
    biggest things that is exciting to people about SimKube is the ability to simulate processes based on external
    metrics (e.g. Prometheus metrics).  This is how, for example, critical components like the Kubernetes Horizontal Pod
    Autoscaler work, and SimKube just... can't do this right now.  I know, more or less, what I need to do to make this
    happen, but I need to actually get started on this, because it will open up a whole set of new markets for me.
  * _Keep the sales and marketing pipeline going_: I have a few folks in various stages of interest in me and/or in
    SimKube right now, but it's incredibly important for me to not drop the ball on this.  One thing I've learned is
    that sales and marketing is like a flywheel: it's incredibly hard to get started, but once you _have_ a pipeline
    going, it's easier to keep it going.  So what I really need to do here is make sure it doesn't _stop_, because I
    don't want to have to repeat all the effort to get it going again.  Concretely, this means that I need to start
    getting ready for KubeCon this fall, because that's been my most successful "marketing venue" thus far[^9][^10][^11].
* **Step 2: Ignore the AI hype wave**.  Look, I'm turning 40 this year, which is when apparently all the old tech
  workers get put out to pasture, but I ain't &$(^ing done yet.  I'm not irrelevant and I'm not going to listen to the
  voices trying to tell me that I am.  I've been explicitly seeking out some competing voices to help provide a more
  rational and realistic point of view[^12], and I think it's time for me to get off LinkedIn again, because I don't
  need that in my life right now.
* **Step 3: Go to therapy and donate money**.  I've been in therapy off-and-on for the last decade or so, and more
  regularly for the last couple years.  This is also maybe something that not every high-powered software engineer
  admits to, but therapy is great actually[^13].  This has been a great spot for me to help process all of the
  everything that is going on around the world and at home.

  I'm also looking for places that I can use my business to donate some money to try to help folks out right now.  Last
  year ACRL sponsored a scholarship for [The Diana Initiative](https://www.dianainitiative.org), and I've been
  considering whether I want to do that again---but also I want to find more and other places I can donate money to help
  underrepresented folks in tech.  That feels like one of the most concrete and immediate actions that I can take to
  combat some of the disgusting nonsense that's taking place today; I just need to get off my butt and do it.

Anyways: I know all of you come and read this in different spaces and different mindsets, and I do genuinely actually
have more technical content to write about again in the future, but hopefully this post is actually helpful for some
other people out there who are in a similar spot to me.

As always, thanks for reading!  Until next time,

~drmorr

[^0]: Insert "They're the same picture" meme here.

[^1]: I did get my grant proposal rejected, which was disappointing, but entirely expected given the current state of
    the US federal government.

[^2]: I just spelled that word correctly on the first try without help from spell-check for I think literally the first
    time in my entire life!

[^3]: I dumped a whole bunch of time into setting up [Pulumi](https://pulumi.com) to manage my AWS infra; I spent almost
    two weeks getting a dumb unit test to pass that provided almost zero value, but my brain couldn't let go of for some
    reason; and I'm currently exploring setting up [VictoriaLogs](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victorialogs/) to
    give me more observability into some of my systems.

[^4]: Just earlier this week I tried to get AI to help me set up [`fck-nat`](https://fck-nat.dev), an alternative NAT
    gateway for AWS, and it got the account number for the `fck-nat` AMI wrong _three times_.  The only reason I knew it
    was wrong was because I was simultaneously reading the `fck-nat` documentation and knew what the correct account
    number was, but I had to re-prompt Claude multiple times to fix it.  There is no universe in which these LLM tools
    demonstrate anything close to intelligence right now.

[^5]: I saw a great post on the socials a while back that basically equivocated the current state of AI discourse with
    the scarcity mindset of our extremely capitalistic society, and concluded by saying "You know what?  I reject the
    scarcity mindset.  Ideas are free, anyone can have them, I don't need an LLM to have half-assed ideas on my behalf
    to be productive."  Anyways I've been thinking about that post a lot recently.

[^6]: Despite the fact that this administration has been extremely open about their plans, so that's on me for not
    paying attention, I guess.

[^7]: I just learned this morning that there's a word for this feeling: it's called [hypernormalization](https://www.theguardian.com/wellness/ng-interactive/2025/may/22/hypernormalization-dysfunction-status-quo)
    and it happened during the fall of the Soviet Union.

[^8]: I _really_ hope the sarcasm and irony is evident in that statement.

[^9]: I have a lot of mixed feelings about travelling to KubeCon this year, particularly given its location as a place
    that is not especially safe for a lot of marginalized people, and also just as a place that is far away and hard to
    get to.  But I think I've decided that I need to go anyways, despite all that.

[^10]: I am extremely frustrated that I missed/wasn't paying attention to the early bird registration deadline this year,
    because the standard ticket pricing is significantly more expensive.  So here's hoping I get a talk accepted so I
    can get a complimentary ticket!

[^11]: KubeCon talk submission deadline is tomorrow at 11:59 Eastern, unless you're one of my paid subscribers reading
    this early, in which case it's next week!

[^12]: This is hard because many of the anti-AI people are just as hyperbolic and vitriolic as the pro-AI people; but I
    just ordered [The AI Con](https://thecon.ai) by [Emily Bender](https://hachyderm.io/@emilymbender@dair-community.social)
    and [Alex Hanna](https://hachyderm.io/@alex@dair-community.social), which I'm excited to read.

[^13]: I hate going, but it's great.
