---
title: "Bare pods are Weird, Man"
authors:
  - drmorr
datetime: 2026-06-01 11:00:00
template: post.html
---

I've been doing some work with [SimKube](https://simkube.dev) for a client recently and have run into a bunch of issues
with SimKube fixed regarding its handling of bare Kubernetes pods.  Bare pods are kindof an unusual special case for
Kubernetes so I thought it might be interesting and/or instructive to see some of the problems I've been having and what
the fixes have looked like.  But before I dive into the details, let me give a quick reminder of what we're all doing
here[^1]:

## A Quick Reminder Of What We're All Doing Here™️

SimKube is a "record-and-replay" simulation environment for Kubernetes that we've been building for the last couple of
years; it works by recording a "trace" of events that occurred in a production Kubernetes environment, and then
replaying those same events in a simulated environment.  In the simulator, we use [KWOK](https://kwok.sigs.k8s.io) to
mock out the application pods and the compute nodes they're running on, while still running all of the real control
plane components.  This lets us simulate extremely large Kubernetes clusters on your local dev machine[^2].

Under "normal" operation, the trace file collects changes over time to "higher-level" Kubernetes resources, like
Deployments, CronJobs, StatefulSets, or any custom resources that you've installed.  It then uses real controllers to
manage those objects and create the actual (simulated) pod objects that they own.  This way you can be sure that the
controllers are running in the same way that they might in a "real" environment[^3].

However, in some cases, you might not want to (or might not be able to) watch the higher-level resources, but you still
want to understand some properties of your production cluster (like autoscaling or scheduling behaviour).  In this case,
you can configure SimKube to watch "bare pods"---that is, the raw pod objects themselves, independent of their owning
resources.  In principle this will work just as well in SimKube; however, because it's a bit of an edge case, it hasn't
been as well tested or supported during development, so we've encountered some problems in the last few weeks.  What
kind of problems?  I'm so glad you asked!

## Bare pods problem #1: Pod Spec Template Paths

The "replay" component of SimKube is called the SimKube driver, which is a pod that sits in your simulation Kubernetes
environments; it is responsible for a) replaying all of the events in the collected trace file, and b) intercepting the
controller-created pod objects to re-target them to the fake KWOK nodes.  In order to apply the correct node selectors,
labels, and annotations to the simulated pods, the driver needs to know what these pods "look like"[^4].  All of the
core Kubernetes resources (Deployments, etc) and _most_ third-party/custom resources do this via a "pod template", where
users actually embed the pod YAML into the higher-level resource and the owning controller will use that template to
"stamp out" copies of the pods it should create.  The SimKube driver modifies the contents of this pod template to make
sure they run in the right place, which means it needs to know "where" in the higher-level manifest that template is
defined.  SimKube does this through a `podSpectemplatePaths` field defined in its configuration[^5], where the path is
represented in [JSON pointer](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6901) notation.  For example, the
`podSpecTemplatePath` for a Deployment is

```text
/spec/template
```

whereas for a CronJob, it is

```text
/spec/jobTemplate/spec/template
```

But what should the `podSpecTemplatePath` for a bare pod be?  It's kindof a weird question because there's no other
controller that is "stamping out" copies of that pod, it's just... the pod.  But it turns out not to matter, because
the SimKube driver can still do all the modifications it needs in order to run the sim.  So, what is it?

If you answered `"/"`, you would be incorrect, but you'd be wrong in good company because [both Ian and I](https://github.com/acrlabs/simkube/pull/240)
 thought that's what it should be at first.  However, it turns out that SimKube prepends the `podSpecTemplatePath` value
to a JSON pointer suffix in several places, and using `"/"` for bare pods results in a double-slash, which is incorrect
and caused everything to crash:

```text
//metadata/labels  # This is not correct
```

The [fix for this](https://github.com/acrlabs/simkube/pull/243/changes) was extremely simple.

## Bare pods problem #2: The pod's already been scheduled

The second "bare pods" problem we ran into was around scheduling; the normal flow of operations in Kubernetes is

1. Something (usually a human operator) creates a resource (like a Deployment).
2. The Kubernetes controller that owns that resource (e.g., [controller-manager](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kube-controller-manager/)
   does some stuff that eventually results in pods getting created.
3. The [Kubernetes scheduler](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kube-scheduler/) tries
   to assign that pod to a node, or report that no node is available.
4. If the pod was scheduled to a node, the [kubelet](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kubelet/)
   starts the containers in the pod and kicks off the application code.

The part we're interested in here is in step 3; see, in the pod specification, there is a `nodeName` field which
indicates what node the pod has been assigned to.  However, this field is immutable; once the pod object has been
created, you can't change it later.  Instead, you have to use the bind API to bind the pod to the node (I wrote an
[entire blog post about this wayyyyyyyy long ago in the early days of ACRL](2023-07-31-writing-k8s-scheduler-rust.md)).

Again, this is all fine and dandy normally, but if your trace file contains bare pods, it is likely that these pods have
already been scheduled to some node in the cluster that the trace came from, which means that the `nodeName` field will
be set to some node that doesn't even exist in your simulation environment!  This clearly will cause problems; the fix
here is again [extremely simple](https://github.com/acrlabs/simkube/pull/242).

## Bare pods problem #3: My pods are running forever!

My initial thinking when tracking bare pods is that they work just like any other Kubernetes resource: we track when
they're created and we track when they go away, and everything else will work as normal.  Pods are weird, though,
because they can _finish_ without being _deleted_.  This is normal in the case of Jobs and CronJobs; it turns out to
_also_ be normal in the case of tracking bare pods.

Fortunately, SimKube has already built in primitives to handle this for Jobs and CronJobs, using the lifecycle
annotation capabilities of KWOK.  Basically, in addition to watching changes to "higher-level"[^6] Kubernetes resources,
the SimKube tracer _also_ can be configured to watch for pod lifecycle events---e.g., when the pod containers start and
finish.  It records all this information inside the trace so these pod lifecycles can be replayed.  In the sim, whenever
we detect matching pod lifecycle data in the trace, we set the following annotations on the simulated pods:

```text
simkube.kwok.io/stage-complete=true
simkube.kwok.io/stage-complete-time="2026-06-01 11:00:00"
```

We then create a [KWOK stage](https://kwok.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/stages-configuration/) such that when the indicated
completion time has passed, KWOK will move the pod from the "Running" phase to the "Succeeded" phase.  Cool!  We should
just be able to use this for bare pods, right?

Turns out, yes you can!  Say it with me now: "The fix is extremely simple."

HAHAHAHAHAHAHA I tricked you good.  The [fix](https://github.com/acrlabs/simkube/pull/251), while being relatively
small, isn't simple.

There are two problems that you run into: the first is that, in order to limit the amount of data in a trace file, we
only record the pod lifecycle data for pods that are owned by a resource that the tracer is tracking.  For bare pods,
there is no such owner!  It turns out that we can just set the pod to be its own owner inside the trace file; it's a
little weird, it's arguable whether this is correct or not, but it does work without needing to do a bunch of
special-casing.

The second problem is that you need to know whether the pod finished running _before_ the simulation started or not.
Remember: the pod _object_ can still exist in etcd, long after all of the containers in the pod have completed running.
If you don't know when the containers stopped relative to the start of the simulation, it's going to throw off all your
analysis[^7].

Unfortunately there's no good way to track this without adding some kind of new field into the trace file, which I was
reticent to do.  It's not impossible, and I made some changes with [SimKube 2.0](2025-02-24-simkube-two.md) so that I
can make these changes in a backwards-compatible way, but I still wanted to avoid it if possible.  Then I came up with a
~dirty hack~ genius solution: instead of modifying the trace file format, I can _instead_ just modify the Kubernetes
resources in the trace.  Now the tracer inserts two annotations on every object it tracks indicating the original
creation time and deletion time of the resource.

_Most_ of the time, this information is just ignored; however, if the resource in the trace is a bare pod, the
simulation driver will see that these values are set on the pod, and it can then use that to calculate the remaining
lifecycle time for that pod object, relative to the starting timestamp on the simulation.

I have no idea if that solution is going to bite me in the future, but for now it seems to work OK.

Also, we're writing some tests to check for regressions in the bare pod behaviour, cuz those things are *#%&ing weird,
man.

~drmorr

[^1]: Hi new readers from Reddit!

[^2]: Or anywhere else you might want, like, say, [in your CI pipeline](2026-04-13-boy-ami-glad-to-see-you.md).

[^3]: Have I used enough "air" "quotes" for you in this post so far?  Don't worry, I'm sure there'll be more!

[^4]: Some people have complained about the number of semicolons and footnotes that I use in my blog posts, so I thought
    I'd branch out and start adding more quotation marks.

[^5]: You might be wondering why this is plural; some third-party Kubernetes resources create multiple different types
    of pods, which mean they have multiple different pod templates defined in different locations in the YAML.

[^6]: There's those darned quotes again.

[^7]: Indeed, I discovered this problem initially because I was comparing simulation results to the actual cluster, and
    discovered that there were more than twice as many running pods in the simulation as there "should have been"[^8].

[^8]: Boom, quotes in footnotes; now I just need a semicolon---and maybe an em-dash[^9].

[^9]: This is how you know I'm not writing this with AI.  If I ever write a post without footnotes, you'll know that
    I've sold out and just asked ChatGPT to write something for me.
